#summary Building PHD2 on OSX

The easiest way to build PHD2 is to use pre-built dependent libraries as we describe here. At the bottom of the page are instructions for building the libraries yourself.

= Building PHD2 on OSX using pre-built dependencies =

 * Install xcode 4

 * Unpack the dependencies bundle [http://adgsoftware.com/phd2/PHD2-OSX-devel-0.2.tar.bz2 PHD2-OSX-devel-0.2.tar.bz2] into a location of your choice:
{{{tar xfj PHD2-OSX-devel-0.2.tar.bz2}}}

 * get phd2 sources

Checkout the open-phd-guiding source tree into this directory so that open-phd-guiding is a sibling of wxWidgets and the other stuff here, like this:

{{{
<top>
  +--- HID Utilities Source
  +--- cfitsio
  +--- libdc1394-2.0.0-rc7
  +--- libusb-1.0.9
  +--- open-phd-guiding
  +--- opencv
  +--- opencv-2.4.6.1
  +--- wxWidgets
  +--- wxWidgets-3.0.0
}}}

This is important because the PHD2 xcode project file will expect to find the dependencies via relative paths.

If you already have a wxWidgets source tree somewhere else that you would prefer to use, you can adjust the symlink to point to that location.

 * Unzip the following two frameworks in extra_frameworks/ into /Library/Frameworks

{{{
  cd <top>
  unzip open-phd-guiding/extra_frameworks/SBIGUDrv.framework.zip -d /Library/Frameworks
  unzip open-phd-guiding/extra_frameworks/fcCamFw.framework.zip -d /Library/Frameworks
}}}

You should now be able to open the xcode project and build and run PHD2.

= Building the dependencies =

Here are some notes on how I built or acquired the dependencies.

== HID Utilities Source ==
This is in the source tree under extra_frameworks, but the xcode project file wants it as a sibling, and not under /Library/Frameworks

{{{
cd <top>/open-phd-guiding/extra_frameworks
unzip 'HID Utilities Source.zip' -d ../../
}}}

== cfitsio ==
I got this from Bret, I assume it was: download, configure, and build

== libdc1394 ==
download libdc1394-2.0.0-rc7 from SourceForge [http://sourceforge.net/projects/libdc1394/]. It's important to get this specific version.

{{{
  ./configure --prefix=/opt/local --enable-shared=no
  make
}}}

== libusb ==
I used Mac ports to install the libusb dependencies. It's probably easier to just download and build them, but I was playing around with Mac ports at the time.

 * install Mac ports
 * edit /opt/local/etc/macports/macports.conf and change build_arch like this:
{{{
build_arch i386
}}}
then
{{{
  sudo port install libusb @1.0.9
  sudo port install libusb-compat @0.1.4
}}}

 * copy the libusb and libusb-compat headers and static libs from /opt/local/ to libusb-1.0.9/
{{{
  cd <top>
  mkdir libusb-1.0.9/
  tar cf - -C /opt/local ./include/libusb-1.0/libusb.h ./include/usb.h ./lib/libusb-1.0.a ./lib/libusb.a | \
    tar xf - -C libusb-1.0.9/
}}}

== opencv ==
I got that from Bret. I'm not even sure we are using that yet on Mac.

== wxWidgets ==

Download the wxWidgets-3.0.0 sources from [http://sourceforge.net/projects/wxwindows/files/]

Unpack the sources in the directory containing open-phd-guiding.

Configure and build:

{{{
  cd wxWidgets-3.0.0
  mkdir Cocoa_32
  cd Cocoa_32
  ../configure --with-libpng=builtin --with-cocoa --disable-shared --with-macosx-version-min=10.6 --enable-macosx_arch=i386 --with-macosx-sdk=/Applications/Xcode.app/Contents/Developer/Platforms/MacOSX.platform/Developer/SDKs/MacOSX10.7.sdk
  make
}}}